# The Open Standard of Evidence-Based Cryonics

### Preamble 

The standard serves to promote long-term sustainability, high quality of services, and ethical business practices in the field of cryonics. 

The standard is open: 
* it's publicly accessible in its entirety 
* it's free to copy and use (including commercial use)
* it's released under the permissive [MIT License](https://github.com/RomanPlusPlus/The-Open-Standard-of-Evidence-Based-Cryonics/blob/master/LICENSE)
* everyone can contribute to its development
* all changes to the standard are logged, and the logs are publicly [available](https://github.com/RomanPlusPlus/The-Open-Standard-of-Evidence-Based-Cryonics/commits/master) 

The first version of this standard was written by Mike Darwin, and released under the MIT License. For the complete list of contributors, see [Contributors](https://github.com/RomanPlusPlus/The-Open-Standard-of-Evidence-Based-Cryonics/graphs/contributors).

### Feedback

This open standard is powered by cryonics community, and is a work in progress. Feedback is highly appreciated!

Please feel free to suggest edits using the ["issue"]( https://github.com/RomanPlusPlus/The-Open-Standard-of-Evidence-Based-Cryonics/issues) feature. You can also subscribe to changes using [RSS](https://github.com/RomanPlusPlus/The-Open-Standard-of-Evidence-Based-Cryonics/commits/master.atom).

--------------------------------

### Table of Contents
<!-- Table of contents generated generated by http://tableofcontent.eu -->
- [1 Introduction](#1-introduction)
- [2 Long-term sustainability of CSOs](#2-long-term-sustainability-of-csos)
  - [2.1 Neutrality](#21-neutrality)
  - [2.2 Management](#22-management)
  - [2.3 Law](#23-law)
    - [2.3.1 Regulatory framework](#231-regulatory-framework)
    - [2.3.2 Informed consent of the patient](#232-informed-consent-of-the-patient)
      - [2.3.2.1 General considerations](#2321-general-considerations)
      - [2.3.2.2 Pre-medication](#2322-pre-medication)
  - [2.4 Financial sustainability](#24-financial-sustainability)
- [3 High quality of services](#3-high-quality-of-services)
  - [3.1 Adequately trained and certified personnel](#31-adequately-trained-and-certified-personnel)
  - [3.2 Evidence-based treatment](#32-evidence-based-treatment)
  - [3.3 Critical data acquisition](#33-critical-data-acquisition)
    - [3.3.1 General considerations](#331-general-considerations)
    - [3.3.2 Storing patient records](#332-storing-patient-records)
    - [3.3.3 Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)](#333-standard-operating-procedures-sops)
    - [3.3.4 Medical examination of the patient](#334-medical-examination-of-the-patient)
    - [3.3.5 Pre-Mortem Cryonics Records](#335-pre-mortem-cryonics-records)
    - [3.3.6 Cryopreservation records](#336-cryopreservation-records)
    - [3.3.7 Autopsy that helps](#337-autopsy-that-helps)
- [4 Ethical business practices](#4-ethical-business-practices)
  - [4.1 Code of Ethics](#41-code-of-ethics)
  - [4.2 Ethical advertising](#42-ethical-advertising)
  - [4.3 Transparency](#43-transparency)
    - [4.3.1 General considerations](#431-general-considerations)
    - [4.3.2 Transparency by default](#432-transparency-by-default)
    - [4.3.3 Transparent management](#433-transparent-management)
    - [4.3.3 Website](#433-website)
    - [4.3.4 Financial records](#434-financial-records)
    - [4.3.5 Patient Case Reports and Histories](#435-patient-case-reports-and-histories)
  - [4.4 Non-discrimination](#44-non-discrimination)
- [5 R&D](#5-rd)
  - [5.1 Prioritization](#51-prioritization)
  - [5.2 Animal research](#52-animal-research)
- [6 Addendum: Brief history of attempts to implement minimum standards in cryonics](#6-addendum-brief-history-of-attempts-to-implement-minimum-standards-in-cryonics)

--------------------------------

### 1 Introduction

The CSO must be a biomedical research organization administering an experimental treatment, rather than a business competing with other businesses for a market share of experimental subjects.

Cryonics is not a business undertaking like selling toasters, automobiles or life insurance. It is not a developed product that can be sold to the masses as a package deal for a monthly fee. Unlike developed products, it is riddled with grave uncertainties, is technically complex, impacts public health and individual psychological, emotional and familial wellbeing and has enormous potential to provoke public outrage if done improperly. Perhaps most importantly it has no clear temporal endpoint. It proposes to maintain human beings in uninterrupted cryogenic care over a period of centuries and then restore them to health and revive them. That is an unprecedent and fantastical proposition in the context of today’s business and commercial environment. The late Carl Sagan famously said that “extraordinary claims require extraordinary proof”. Similarly, cryonics is an extraordinary undertaking (to say the least) and as such it requires extraordinary precautions to safeguard it and to make its mission both credible and feasible.

It is important to digress briefly here and discuss the problematic nature of such a high degree of accountability to a cryonics organization in particular. All organizations find this level of accountability extremely difficult to achieve. There are many reasons for this but chief amongst of them are these two: the basic human desire to avoid owning failure, error or misdeeds, and the ammunition public knowledge of failure, error or misdeeds provides an enemy. Which segues into the next point.

Cryonics has become fear driven and in nearly constant crisis mode. Crises driven operation is necessarily mostly reactive rather than proactive. This is not how any successful organization advances scientifically or financially. Indeed, it is not how success is achieved in any area of organizational operations, even in successfully defending the organization in the long run. Because of this situation it is especially difficult for cryonics organizations to have a high level of accountability, even about seemingly harmless facts pertaining to their procedures and policies because cryonics is not an established business institution, has an increasing number of serious enemies, is widely misunderstood, has been subject to unjustified distortion and sensationalism, has been subjected to repeated rounds of invasive and destructive media siege, and is increasingly coming under governmental scrutiny. 

Under such circumstances it is completely understandable for a “bunker mentality” to develop. Further, in order to protect its human cryopatients a cryonics organization may have to develop not only a bunker mentality, but very aggressive and covert means to defend the wellbeing of its patients. Yet, in the long-term, such means have a damaging effect on CSOs and cryonics in general. 

The only way to ensure the long-term sustainability of the cryonics effort is to be open and accountable, use the scientific method and Evidence Based Cryonics (EBC), and diligently communicate comprehensive and accurate information to cryonics organization members / clients.

### 2 Long-term sustainability of CSOs

#### 2.1 Neutrality
As an experimental treatment cryonics is not a religious, philosophical, social, political or other enterprise advocating for any given ideology. As such, it should disconnect itself from the dissemination and promotion of specific social, economic or political ideologies. While a majority of those who opt for cryopreservation may have in common the same beliefs and allegiances, the cryonics organizations should remain agnostic and disconnected in this regard. Governments and religions jealousy guard their roles as the creators and gatekeepers of ideologies and often punish those who trespass on their territory; consider the Falun Gong in China, or abortion clinics in the US.

#### 2.2 Management

##### 2.2.1 Selection of directors 

The Board of Directors of the organization should represent the membership and be selected by the membership. This does not mean that everyone who becomes a member has the right to vote. There are many perils associated with such a system, including the takeover, hostile or otherwise, from outsiders as has already been attempted in several cryonics organisations.

Directors can be selected only from the highest, most experienced and well vetted class of members. Additionally, they should undergo thorough background checks to screen not just for criminal behavior, but for financial and personal responsibility and stability. A core objective of such vetting is to screen out sociopathic or psychopathic individuals who would represent a threat to the stability and viability of the organization.

The Board should be selected by members who have a vested interest in the organization. At a minimum, this should mean that they must have remained members with cryopreservation arrangements in good standing for a reasonable period of time, at which time they should be accorded one vote. Several additional classes of membership should exist based on well defined and pre-specified achievements in service and personal education about cryonics which are acquired over time. These members may be given additional votes as a result of this higher level of involvement and vetting. A preliminary proposal for the initial vesting interval is 5 years.

Beyond the requirement of 5 consecutive years as a cryopreservation member or client, the board shall establish clear policies and procedures setting the length of terms and the number of consecutive terms a board member may serve.

Everyone who has cryonics arrangements is not necessarily a committed cryonicist. A committed cryonicist is someone who has sought out cryonics, completed the necessary legal and financial arrangements and who remains both signed up and engaged with their cryonics organization over a period of years. Currently, cryonics is infested with individuals whose first contact with cryonics was as a job applicant and who have made cryonics arrangements primarily because it improves their scope of authority and credibility within the organization. Hired hands are just that, hired hands; they don’t get to run the ranch. The scope of authority of such opportunistic cryonicists should be severely limited and they should never occupy core administrative, technical or financial positions within the organization. Failure to follow this dictum has already resulted in embezzlement, fraud and grossly deficient patient care.

##### 2.2.2 Board diversity

The board should have enough members to allow for full deliberation and diversity of thinking on governance and other organizational matters. Except for very small organizations, this generally means that the board should have at least five members.

The board must include members with the diverse background experience, and organizational and financial skills necessary to advance the organization’s mission. 

##### 2.2.3 Independent board members

At least two-thirds of the board members, should be independent. 

Independent members should not: 
  * be compensated by the organization as employees or independent contractors; 
  * have their compensation determined by individuals who are compensated by the organization; 
  * receive, directly or indirectly, material financial benefits from the organization except as a member of the charitable class served by the organization; or 
  * be related to anyone described above (as a spouse, sibling, parent or child), or reside with any person so described.

##### 2.2.4 Officers

The board shall hire, oversee, and biannually evaluate the performance of the chief executive officer of the organization, and should conduct such an evaluation prior to any change in that officer’s compensation, unless there is a multi-year contract in force or the change consists solely of routine adjustments for inflation or cost of living.

All officers must have been brain preservation members or clients of the organization for a minimum of 5 consecutive years before becoming eligible to serve as a director or officer. In the case of newly forming CSOs, officers and directors must have been members or clients of another CSO for a minimum of 3 consecutive years.

##### 2.2.5 Regular reviews

The CSO must have a governing body that is responsible for reviewing and approving the organization’s mission and strategic direction, annual budget and key financial transactions, compensation practices and policies, and fiscal and governance policies.

The board should establish and review regularly the organization’s mission and goals and should evaluate, no less frequently than every five years, the organization’s programs, goals and activities to be sure they advance its mission and make prudent use of its resources.

The board should review organizational and governing instruments no less frequently than every 3 years.

Board members should evaluate their performance as a group and as individuals no less frequently than every 2 years, and should have clear, written procedures for removing board members who are unable to fulfill their responsibilities.

The board of should review its own size and structure periodically. 

##### 2.2.6 Emergency plans

The organization must have a detailed, written plan of action to protect its patients in cryopreservation against legal or legislative attack, economic instability, insurgent attack by anti-cryonics individuals or entities, as well as plans to cope with and prevail over known existential risks to which its patients may be subject (i.e., hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, blizzards, etc.).

The organization’s board must ensure that the organization has adequate plans to protect its assets—its property, financial and human resources, programmatic content and material, and its integrity and reputation—against damage or loss. The board should review regularly the organization’s need for general liability and directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, as well as take other actions necessary to mitigate risks.

The organization shall have in place policies and procedures to protect and preserve the organization’s important documents and business records.

#### 2.3 Law

##### 2.3.1 Regulatory framework

The CSO shall be a legally incorporated entity which complies with all applicable federal laws and regulations, as well as applicable laws and regulations of the states and the local jurisdictions in which it is based or operates. If the organization conducts programs outside the United States, it must also abide by applicable international laws, regulations and conventions that are legally binding on the United States.

Create a comprehensive regulatory framework which is applied both within the organization and outside of it. This regulatory framework should be submitted to the legislature of the state where the cryonics organization is located in order to create a state board for oversight and for punitive measures when negligence or misconduct occurs. Be prepared to pay the costs of this oversight and to incorporate said costs in charges to members and patients. This would be an example of an initially “unforeseen” contingency in cryonics. Sooner or later cryonics will be regulated and with such regulation will come added costs.

##### 2.3.2 Informed consent of the patient

###### 2.3.2.1 General considerations
Establish a comprehensive informed consent document (book) which describes in detail each aspect of the procedure, its (range of) costs and its risks and benefits. Members should be made to understand, as just one example, the limitations of CPR in providing adequate blood-flow, the attendant complications such as pulmonary edema and bleeds, how its efficacy is dynamically evaluated (capnography) and what the typical outcome will be. The document should ensure that patients understand the basic mechanics, hazards and possible benefits of each procedure performed on them.

Every member must be individually counseled by trained cryonics organization personnel to ensure that informed consent has been obtained. This counseling session(s) must be video recorded and placed into the members’ cryopreservation documentation file and ultimately become a part of his cryopreservation records.

Instead of spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on marketing and on promotional videos such money would be better spent on educational videos making the informed consent process more accessible and user friendly.

Where time permits, all at need (i.e., terminally ill non-client ) patients who are making their own cryopreservation arrangements (including those being assisted by family members) must have a psychiatric examination by an independent state licensed, APA board certified psychiatrist to evaluate their competency and lack of undue influence . His exam must be documented in writing and by videography.

###### 2.3.2.2 Pre-medication
All clients and patients are offered information on pre-medication strategies which they can use at their discretion. Care is taken not apply any pressure to use any of these approaches because all of them have varying degrees of risk. Because of this risk, it is important to begin educating clients early about the advantages of this modality. The goal is to have the client ask the organization about pre-medication at the time s/he is diagnosed as terminally ill. This is exactly the kind of information a monthly newsletter and a quality website can communicate effectively to members.

If pre-medication is accepted it will be carefully documented on a record customized to the individual clients’ protocol. Where pre-medication is undertaken it should be with the knowledge and consent of both the organization’s Medical Director and the patient’s primary care physician.

#### 2.4 Financial sustainability
Create and maintain segregated funding that is adequate to provide for the long-term care of all the organization’s patients. This fund should be independent of the public-dealing, business aspects of the organization in order to serve as protection against ruinous litigation. The amount of money required as a minimum per patient should be calculated by reasonable and responsible methods taking into account all current required expenditures, inflation and the potential for unknown future costs.

### 3 High quality of services

#### 3.1 Adequately trained and certified personnel
All biomedical personnel must be adequately trained and certified in order to participate in human cryopreservations. This means the creation of a training and certification program for each phase of the cryopreservation procedure including, but not limited to: interface with the terminal patient, his family and medical care givers, standby for acute stabilization, stabilization (cardiopulmonary support, drug administration, induction of hypothermia, blood washout and/or ECMO, etc.), safe transportation to the cryonics facility, cryoprotective perfusion, cool-down to storage temperature and long term storage. Such training must include extensive didactic and hands-on training with appropriate testing and evaluation to establish that the required knowledge and skills have been mastered.

The knowledge and skills of the personnel employed in clinical cryopreservation must be maintained with regular continuing education and training employing live animals and employing validation by the pre-specified technologies the organization uses to represent its outcomes to its members and to the public.

Personnel involved in the delivery of patient care must either be vetted members or continuously supervised in the field and in the facility by vetted members specially trained for the task. It is not acceptable to have the cryopreservation treatment administered unsupervised by non-cryonicist contractors. In human clinical trials, the principal investigator closely supervises the procedures carried out on patients by everyone, including contractors.

Defined penalties for errors, negligence or malfeasance must be created, given to personnel and enforced. Serious harm to a patient due to negligence or malfeasance should result in the immediate removal of that person from their job and termination as soon as is practical with no possibility of a return to providing any kind of cryonics service.

#### 3.2 Evidence-based treatment 
Evidence of the efficacy of cryonics treatment procedures should come from animal models that reflect the advanced age, ill health, agonal shock and warm and cold ischemia in every class of patient the organization proposes to treat.

Similarly, there should be TEM and preferably focused ion beam tomography on brain tissue from both animals and patients subjected to varying periods of ischemia and straight freezing to simulate situations where there is a long postmortem delay, delayed or absent refrigeration, autopsy and so on. Members and patients have the right to something more than a “black box” of hope that depends upon the technological achievements and largesse of purported superior future beings, often referred to as “transhumans”.

above all treatments offered should be validated in relevant animal models and backed up with appropriate laboratory, clinical and electron microscopic data obtained for each patient subjected to the treatment. What this means is that the treatment to be given should be demonstrated to meet its a priori specifications in a specified animal model using the personnel, techniques and facilities that the cryonics organization uses on its human patients. Put more simply, “If we do this under these conditions with our personnel and facilities, we get this result XX% of the time.

These data must be prepared to the same standard and in the same manner as peer-reviewed biomedical papers and published and updated to reflect any changes in the clinical (human) protocol, as well as additional findings as may be necessary.

Reversible (survivable) parts of the cryopreservation must be validated on an ongoing basis using an appropriate survival animal model.

Since human cryopreservation is marketed as an experimental, potentially lifesaving treatment, it must adhere to the reasonable requirements of other medical research. This means that a defined treatment is given under reasonably consistent conditions with continuous surveillance of the procedure to identify deviations from protocol, evidence of harm and the response of the patient to all treatments or interventions that are applied. 

Cryonics, as currently practiced, cannot meet these requirements since it has no exclusion or inclusion criteria. In effect, cryonics accepts “all comers”, including individuals in advanced states of decomposition, who have been autopsied or who are otherwise amenable only to refrigeration to arrest further decomposition. It is suggested that if cryonics organizations wish to cryopreserve such individuals that they a create distinct subsidiary organization that offers cryopreservation as a cosmetic preservative procedure, with no attached implication of it being in any way a scientific undertaking, and with absolutely no implication or intimation that revival of the person so treated will eventuate.

#### 3.3 Critical data acquisition

##### 3.3.1 General considerations
The core elements of establishing effective biomedical feedback (biomedical being understood here to mean all technical aspects of patient care and related research operations, including animal research) are the intensive, multifaceted and accurate collection of data and the reduction, analysis and open publication of that data in a timely basis. This document will list specific examples of patient care data which need to be collected as a minimum standard. This is done to both to allow for evaluation of the likely costs and problems involved in such achieving such accountability, and to point out the deficiencies present in all current cryonics operations. Animal research data which needs to be gathered will be more specific to the experimental protocol and will not be discussed in exhaustive detail here, although where specific costly facilities or equipment are known to be needed, they will be enumerated and discussed.

Beginning with the first contact records are maintained of significant contacts with the client. Comprehensive contractual paperwork such as that developed from Alcor’s paperwork by CryoCare is used to establish and maintain contractual relations with the client. These documents are confidential only when executed by the client. Once executed, these documents are treated as medical records (under the definition of HIPPA legislation); available only to authorized persons within the organization, except when ordered disclosed by a court of law. Validity of contracts is safeguarded by insuring that proper funding exists (through the now well developed means of trust structuring, prepayment, organizational insurance policy ownership, etc.), and that where appropriate, potential clients are legally capable of giving consent (i.e., at need cases where a relative is being presented for care, clients with questionable mental competency, etc.).

##### 3.3.2 Storing patient records
All patient records (documents, photo images, video images, raw data, graphs, charts or other data) which are understood to include clients’ names, contractual status, financial transactions related to cryopreservation services, medical records, cryopreservation records, patient transfer records, government permits or forms, and storage records are to be maintained confidential upon the clients’ instructions and are secured in a fire resistant (2-hour burn time) GSA rated safe or filing cabinet in a secured area (away from access by all but authorized personnel) both of which are kept locked at all times when such records are not being accessed. All such records shall be maintained in triplicate as follows: The master set consisting of original documents are stored off-site with a bonded third-party in a highly physically secure location; an example of an acceptable third party would be Underground Vaults and Storage (UVSI) in Hutchison, KS.

A second set of records is maintained as a duplicate master (which includes digitally stored copies of any analog materials such as photographs). These two sets of records are to be treated as inviolate and may be accessed only with the written consent of the Department head in charge of Cryopreservation Services, the Medical Director and the CEO of the organization. The third set of records is a working set which contains only analog data. The secured area contains no photocopying or duplicating equipment on a routine basis, and employees or others who enter the secured area are searched to insure they are not covertly carrying duplicating equipment with them. When records are to be prepared for publication, appropriate access (i.e., provision of copying and computing equipment in the secure area) will be granted in writing only by a quorum of the organization’s board of directors and responsibility for supervising such data acquisition will be that of the CEO. Records being prepared for publication by being copied and having identifying information stripped from them are not removed from the secure area until all identifying features have been removed.

##### 3.3.3 Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)
All aspects of research and patient care operations are documented by Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) which are sufficiently detailed to allow for replication of the procedure by anyone knowledgeable in the art. All equipment used in such procedures, specialized or otherwise, has fully documented instructions for proper care, use and anticipated maintenance. Other than in cases where there is proprietary interest preventing full disclosure, all SOPs are open source and available for client inspection. Checklists for most aspects of operations, inventories with expiry’s with high and low levels requiring action for all supplies, and checklists for routine maintenance of equipment are maintained. Where appropriate, logs are maintained noting storage conditions for sensitive supplies and equipment and any significant deviations and actions taken are also maintained. A few examples of the latter are refrigerator logs, vehicle maintenance logs, and battery discharge/recharge logs. Equipment identified as critical to delivering cryopreservation services or conducting accurate research is evaluated and reported upon to the appropriate manager on a quarterly basis, or more often if necessary.

##### 3.3.4 Medical examination of the patient
Patient records (as opposed to Client records) are understood to begin with the patient’s medical history and records and include documentation of the patient’s pre-cardiac arrest condition. A diligent effort is made to gather these records both pre and post cryopreservation. Where possible, when the patient has been diagnosed as terminal, a competent physician (hopefully the organization’s Medical Director) examines the patient, confirms the patient’s terminal status, completes a comprehensive history and physical (H&P) and documents it on an organizationally approved H&P form. At this time the patient should be evaluated as to sensorium and, as appropriate, specific tests given to determine the degree of mental impairment present, if any (e.g., the Stanford Mini-Mental Status exam which is simple and requires only a writing tool and paper). Where the physician deems it appropriate and material to the integrity of the patient’s cryopreservation arrangements a referral may be made to a psychiatrist, neurologist or other appropriate medical professional. A standard lab panel (CBC and serum chemistries) is drawn as a baseline and, where economically feasible more detailed laboratory studies are undertaken such as a Pantox Profile. The Pantox profile provides a detailed evaluation of the nutrients and metabolites which are currently known to be most protective (and thus most predictive) of cerebral and systemic ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Where the patient accedes, the physician should discuss both alternative treatment strategies where there is a possibility of benefit (i.e., LEF style approaches and conventional medical research trials of investigational drugs, devices or procedures). The patient is reassessed by the organization’s physician, nurse or technician (the latter under the physician’s supervision) on a regular basis, and lab work repeated when necessary to follow the patient’s condition. Lab work will also be used in situations where there is the desire on the part of the patient to evaluate the effectiveness of pre-cryopreservation interventions to reduce ischemic injury, prevent peri- and post-cardiac arrest clotting and generally improve the patient’s chances for quality cryopreservation. All serum laboratory samples should be divided into two parts after collection: one part is sent out of evaluation and the other is cryopreserved as a reference sample, forensic safeguard, and for possible evaluation by potentially valuable testing modalities not currently envisioned or anticipated.

Where there is the significant possibility of sudden death, this is discussed with the patient and options to deal with this contingency (both therapeutic and non-therapeutic such as monitoring equipment) are made available consistent with finances and the unique logistics of the situation.

All exams and discussions with the patient which are of a critical nature, where consent is given, should be video graphed using digital videography equipment.

##### 3.3.5 Pre-Mortem Cryonics Records
Pre-Mortem Cryonics Records are understood to include regular phone interviews about health, wellbeing and prognoses. 
These also include Standby records such as patient medical assessments:
* Karnofsky’s score
* Glasgow Coma Score
* Vitals: HR, RR, BP, breath sounds, SpO2, LOC or GCS (q. 4 hours or more often as needed)
* Medications
* All charting up to the time of cardiopulmonary arrest
* Staff (cryonics organization, hospice and others) present and their shift hours

Narrative notes should also be made if the patient was alone with staff during any period of critical illnesses where LOC was impaired.

Organizational Nursing Notes or Checklists must be completed and included in the record. These include Transport Overview, Emergency Information Questionnaire (where applicable), Patient Assessment Sheet (both pages including list of medications), Transport Team, Organization and Coordination (where job duties are assigned), Hospital and Physician Checklist, Funeral Director Checklist, ME’s Checklist,” Autopsy Checklist (where appropriate), and a Transport Data Collection Form which allows for systematic and linear gathering of the data described above.

All data for critical parameters must be reduced to graphic forms in real time so that trends can be seen and the appropriate action taken.

##### 3.3.6 Cryopreservation records 
Cryopreservation records are understood to include the following:
* Transport Data: which includes all notes and check sheets documenting the care the patient was given starting at the time Transport Team members were allowed to begin post cardiac arrest care:
  * Estimated or known pre-arrest hypoxic time, time of arrest, ischemic time, time
  * Nature of CPS initiation, full description of CPS (compression rate, type of CPR, ventilation rate and volume/pressure)
  * Estimated or known hypoxic time after arrest (i.e., time till ventilation begun) response to CPS as documented minimally by EtCO2, pulse oximetry
  * Gross patient response to CPS (skin color and pulses) should be rechecked and charted every 10 minutes
  * Patient temperatures which must include esophageal and rectal temperatures
  * Blood samples drawn: Samples must also be labeled clearly at to patient, time and source. Samples should be drawn at the start of CPS and less than every 15 minutes thereafter. Where economically feasible a baseline Pantox sample should be drawn at arrest and then at 30-minute intervals until the patient’s temperature reaches 15 degrees C or TBW is begun.

* All of these variables must be collected at regular intervals and the time duly noted. All formal checklists should be as complete as possible and included in this record.
* Transport medications given
* Initiation of cooling and the method used (PIB/SCD, peritoneal lavage, GLV cooling, or a combination), and of blood samples drawn at regular intervals during CPS.
* Temperatures, EtCO2, oximetry data, should be collected at 5-minute intervals and more often if possible. Automated data collection for these and other parameters is highly desirable.
* Death Certificate, Burial Transit Permits: and any other state legal documents required to gain access to, move, or retain custody of the patient. A certified cope of the patient’s death certificate should remain in his/her file at all times, as well as a copy of the state disposition permit for whole body patients.
* Ground/Air Transport Data: such as details of how the patient was packed for shipment and refrigerated for remote air or ground travel. A narrative of air/ground travel, temperature readings taken manually or by data-logger during such transport, time of arrival at the organization’s facility, and details of removal from packaging and placement on the operating table is also essential. Both departure and arrival core temperatures should be a part of this record. It is critically important that these and wherever possible as much of the foregoing operations be digitally video graphed and photographed to document the standard of care, performance of individual personnel, and details which cannot or are not recorded by scribe(s) or automated equipment.

Cryoprotective Perfusion Data:
* Pre-arrival checklists perfusate preparation procedure including composition, validating measurements, lots #s and manufacturers for all ingredients
* Perfusion circuit diagram and any modifications thereto
* Operative Narratives with illustrations (sketches) of all procedures done
* Perfusion Data Collection Sheets documenting at a minimum:
* Temperatures (brain, nasopharyngeal, tympanic, surface, and (whole body ) rectal. **High–Low Alarms (HLA)**
* Pressures: arterial (patient), central venous, pre-arterial filter (filter loading)
* intracranial (where indicated), intra-abdominal (where indicated) HLA
* Flows (arterial, CPA pump, cardiotomy) HLA
* pH (arterial and venous)
* sweep gas composition
* Perfusate (A&V) measured gases and electrolytes (if any)
* Concentrate and Recirculating reservoir levels HLA
* Refractive indexes and CPA concentrations HLA
* Results of serum chemistries
* Computer acquired data.

All data must be reduced to graphic form for meaningful interpretation.

Cooling to storage temperature including all thermal data and “crackphone” data HLA: This data is reduced to graphic form as well as appended in tabular form. Narrative notes include a detailed description of how the patient was handled every step of the way following the termination of CPA perfusion and placement into long-term storage. These narratives must have a timeline with sensitive data (i.e., the patient’s temperatures) being documented both over time and as they correlate with each significant intervention. An example here would be how much, if any, temperature change occurred during transfer of the patient from the cool down chamber to a sleeping bag and aluminum pod for long term storage or to the neuro cool-down unit.

Extensive and uninterrupted photographic and digital video documentation of every step of the procedure. Typically, 300 to 400 photographs should be taken for a case involving both transport and CPA perfusion. Photos should document equipment used, personnel, surgical and other procedures, and the patient’s response to these procedures.

##### 3.3.7 Autopsy that helps
The non-cryopreserved portion of every neuropatient’s remains are subjected to a thorough autopsy to determine the cause of death (which past in-house experience has found to be at variance with what is on the death certificate ~30% of the time), evaluate the effects of transport procedures (Thumper injuries, correct placement of ET tube, lines, etc., and adverse or other effects of transport medications), further instruct the staff in anatomy, help evaluate alternative treatments, and recover organs and tissues for quality control and training as may be necessary. Whole body patients are examined thoracically in a nondestructive manner to determine cause of death and the presence of any unanticipated pathology which might affect the quality of care (i.e., pulmonary edema, cardiac hypertrophy, pneumothorax, incorrect ET or gastric tube placement, etc.). Tissue samples for subsequent histopathological evaluation will be gathered as appropriate.

Routine autopsy also has the tremendous advantage of acquainting the staff (even seasoned and medically experienced team members) with the extent to which and the ways in which various lethal diseases impact multiple organ systems. For example, it often becomes clear why gas exchange or circulation was sub-optimum during transport when autopsy discloses lungs which are ~80% solid tumor or a heart which is compressed by a pericardial effusion.

CNS material from every patient which has been subjected to vitrification (or when necessary freezing) is examined by TEM. Tissue samples will be collected from every patient where possible at the beginning and the conclusion of cryoprotective perfusion. These samples will include non-damaging quantities of brain, spinal cord (neuropatients only), skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, liver, kidney (neuropatients only), ileum, and such other tissues as may be determined to be useful in evaluating the quality of care given. Samples which are cryoprotected (i.e., from the CPA perfused portion of the patient) are divided into two aliquots. One aliquot is fixed in an appropriate fashion and prepared for Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and subsequently evaluated by TEM. The other aliquot is placed in a suitable container and inserted into an insulated sleeve which simulates the cooling curve achieved when an average human head is cooled convectively to the Tg of the CPA solution being used. These samples are then rewarmed, fixed, prepared for and subjected to TEM.

Where possible, tissue samples are taken during surgery to connect the patient to the CPA extracorporeal circuit and are fixed for subsequent TEM. The purpose of this sample taking is to evaluate the degree of ischemic changes, if any, which have occurred as a result of agonal shock, global ischemia prior to CPS, CPS, TBW and hypothermic transport to the organization’s cryoprotective perfusion facilities. While it is not always possible to sort out which of these elements of care might be responsible for ischemic changes or degraded ultrastructure, this evaluation will definitively document the patient’s ultrastructural condition upon arrival. Taken in conjunction with Pantox studies, careful review of the adequacy of circulatory support during transport (CO, EtCO2, SpO2, in-field blood gases and electrolytes) and other factors, it should be possible to begin correlating peri-arrest and post arrest events with eventual outcome as measured by ultrastructural integrity.

While it may not be possible to bear the cost of processing all of these samples on every patient, they should be collected and subjected to processing up to the point at which they are indefinitely (~100 years or more) stable; embedding in Epon (which is done prior to sectioning and TEM). This is an inexpensive procedure and can, if necessary, be done in-house.

The above notwithstanding, CNS material from every patient which has been subjected to vitrification (or when necessary freezing) is examined by TEM. This is the final quality control arbiter and the organization; its clients and where appropriate the patient’s family should know how the case “turned out.” TEM will (along with gross examination of the patient following cooling to Tg and possibly using other modalities to be discussed later) provide unambiguous feedback about the state of the fine structure currently thought to encode the patient’s personal identity.

### 4 Ethical business practices

#### 4.1 Code of Ethics

The organization shall have a formally adopted, written code of ethics with which all of its directors or trustees, staff and volunteers are familiar and to which they adhere and they will adopt and implement policies and procedures to ensure that all conflicts of interest, or the appearance thereof, within the organization and the board are appropriately managed through disclosure, recusal, or other means. 

This Code of Ethics shall cover accountability, finances, openness, client/member rights, patient rights, confidentiality of medical and cryopreservation records, conduct of staff, and basic procedures for filing and adjudicating grievances within the organization by clients/patients and professional employees.

#### 4.2 Ethical advertising
Stop misleading and deceiving the membership and the public by calling the treatment on offer “vitrification”. Vitrification, in the context of cryobiology and cryonics, means the ice-free preservation of tissues, organs or people. If your CT scans show widespread ice formation in the brains of patients, even when the treatment takes place under optimum conditions, you're not doing vitrification. If you don't measure ice formation, you're not doing vitrification.

Stop presenting animal research that purports to show good brain preservation by the treatment being used on humans when that research was not conducted on applicable animal models. If your Transmission Electron Micrographs (TEMs) were obtained only from healthy, living animals under ideal laboratory conditions that do not pertain to any cryonics patient, you're misleading. All cryonics patients will necessarily have experienced significant periods of warm and cold ischemia, with most having experienced many minutes to many hours of both. In addition, many will have had some period of agonal shock during which hypoxia and ischemia of varying degrees will have occurred before medicolegal death.

All cryonics organizations must accurately and fairly represent the true cost of their procedures. For instance, there is no evidence that any member-patient has ever expired on CSO’s doorstep with death certificate and burial-transit permit in hand (not to mention being packed in ice). Make your clients aware of the essential services not covered in your advertised price tag for their treatment. Necessarily refrigeration, removal, transportation of the patient and the securing of the necessary paperwork will add a variable number of thousands of dollars to the cost of the procedure which should be made clear by providing a realistic price range for clients.

#### 4.3 Transparency

##### 4.3.1 General considerations
Quality control measures which provide feedback about the nature and effectiveness of all of the organization’s procedures will be publicly disclosed in an open and timely fashion. This is understood to include not only medical, cryobiological, patient care, or other technical and scientific procedures, but also financial, administrative and business procedures as well. Both classes of disclosure, technical and administrative will be discussed in some detail below. Please bear in mind that while this discussion will be considerably detailed, it is not intended to be exhaustive. Nor should it be. The clear message of this point is that a culture of openness and accountability is perhaps the most important ingredient to the long-term success of any cryonics organization or, for that matter, or any high quality medical institution.

The organization must make information about its operations, including its governance, finances, programs and activities, widely available to the public. Charitable organizations shall make information available on the methods they use to evaluate the outcomes of their work and must share the results of those evaluations with members.

##### 4.3.2 Transparency by default
All aspects of the organization’s operations which are to be confidential are defined in the bylaws of the organization and the Bylaws are publicly available via the Internet and as hard copy upon request by any client for a modest fee to cover duplication, shipping and handling. Failure to disclose in any area not specified in the Bylaws is grounds for removal of any Officers, Directors, or employees who conceal activities or events material to any aspect of the organization’s operations.
Monthly publication

A monthly publication is made available to clients that discloses all relevant organizational activities. If desired, a second publication may be used to present technical reports on patient care, cryopreservation research and other matters which would be inappropriate for the general clientele or general public. Both publications are included with the client’s basic service package at no additional fee. If a separate technical publication is issued, the client may accept or decline it as s/he chooses.

Except in rare instances (and routine matters of client confidentiality) all matters which are critical to the operation of the organization are disclosed in a forthright manner in the monthly publication. This includes regular reports on cryopreservation readiness (and disclosure of how readiness is evaluated), research activities, case histories and what has been learned from them, including disclosure of any material error or deficit in care, social and political events of direct relevance to cryonics and the organization, opportunities for education, training, employment, volunteerism and such other internal organizational news as will allow the client to be informed and aware of the organization’s health and progress. A specific part of the newsletter is given over to client feedback which can be edited for length and repetitiveness but not for substance.

##### 4.3.3 Transparent management
Make management transparent to members. The reality is that very little of Board business is required to be conducted in camera. Vice thrives in the dark. It is very unlikely that there would have been serious board discussions about switching whole-body members to neuro without their consent had these discussions been held in the sunlight. Transparent Board meetings also expose the quality of management and of its decisions to ongoing scrutiny by the membership.

##### 4.3.3 Website
An organizational website containing detailed resources on every aspect of cryonics is maintained. This website includes an extensive technical library, links to other websites with relevant information, complete contractual paperwork, curriculum vitae of personnel as well as Officers and Directors, SOPs and lay-level descriptions of procedures. Blog-type hypertext linkage should be used if feasible. The website also contains a feedback area where comments from validated clients can be logged indefinitely and viewed by the general public without undue editing, as well as comments from visitors to the site who are not clients. The client’s ID# can serve as his/her password.

Training and teaching materials are made available to clients who request them at the cost of copying and mailing these materials. In the case of large volumes of material, a reasonable handling fee may be added to the cost of these documents which the client pays.

##### 4.3.4 Financial transparency
Financial records are maintained by a competent bookkeeper and are reviewed yearly by a licensed CPA. These records are posted on the website and made available as hard copy in a timely fashion to clients who request them.

###### 4.3.4.1 Financial audit

The cryonics organization must keep complete, current, and accurate financial records. Its board should receive and review timely reports of the organization’s financial activities and should have a qualified, independent financial expert audit or review these statements annually in a manner appropriate to the organization’s size and scale of operations.

For cryonics organizations with more than $500,000 U.S. in assets the independent financial expert must be certified public accountant (CPA).

CSOs with assets of $1 million U.S., shall have an audit committee composed of independent board members with appropriate financial expertise. By reducing possible conflicts of interest between outside auditors and the organization’s paid staff, an audit committee can provide the board greater assurance that the audit has been conducted appropriately. If state law permits, the board may appoint non-voting, non-staff advisors, rather than board members, to the audit committee.

###### 4.3.4.2 Soliciting funds

Solicitation materials and other communications addressed to donors and the public must clearly identify the organization and be accurate and truthful.

Without exception, contributions must be used for purposes consistent with the donor’s intent, whether as described in the relevant solicitation materials or as specifically directed by the donor.

The organization, if a 501(c)3, must provide donors with specific acknowledgments of charitable contributions, in accordance with IRS requirements, as well as information to facilitate the donors’ compliance with tax law requirements.

The organization must have clear, written policies, based on its purpose as a CSO to determine whether accepting a gift would compromise its ethics, financial circumstances, program focus, or the well-being of the patients in its care.

The CSO should provide appropriate training and supervision of the people soliciting funds on its behalf to ensure that they understand their responsibilities and applicable federal, state and local laws, and do not employ techniques that are coercive, intimidating, or intended to harass potential donors.

The organization shall not compensate internal or external fundraisers based on a commission or a percentage of the amount raised.

The CSO shall respect the privacy of individual donors and, except where disclosure is required by law, shall not sell or otherwise make available the names and contact information of its donors without providing them an opportunity at least once a year to opt out of the use of their names.

###### 4.3.4.3 Expenses

The board of the organization must institute policies and procedures to ensure that the organization (and, if applicable, its subsidiaries) manages and invests its funds responsibly, in accordance with all legal requirements. The full board should review and approve the organization’s annual budget and should monitor actual performance against the budget.

The organization shall spend at least 30% of its annual budget on programs that pursue its mission. The budget should also provide sufficient resources for effective administration of the organization, and, if it solicits contributions, for appropriate fundraising activities.

The CSO should not provide loans (or the equivalent, such as loan guarantees, purchasing or transferring ownership of a residence or office, or relieving a debt or lease obligation) to directors, officers, or trustees.

The CSO shall establish clear, written policies for paying or reimbursing expenses incurred by anyone conducting business or traveling on behalf of the organization, including the types of expenses that can be paid for or reimbursed and the documentation required. Such policies should require that travel on behalf of the organization is to be undertaken in a cost-effective manner.

The organization shall neither pay for nor reimburse travel expenditures for spouses, dependents or others who are accompanying someone conducting business for the organization unless they, too, are conducting such business.

###### 4.3.4.4 Compensation to board members 

Board members are generally expected to serve without compensation, other than reimbursement for expenses incurred to fulfill their board duties. 

A charitable organization that provides compensation to its board members should use appropriate comparability data to determine the amount to be paid, document the decision and provide full disclosure to anyone, upon request, of the amount and rationale for the compensation.

##### 4.3.5 Patient Case Reports and Histories 

Since each clinical case constitutes an experimental biomedical procedure it must documented, by video and other data recording and reduced a written case report in a comprehensive, consistent and standardized format. Such case reports must be openly published by the cryonics organization. Such reports must be completed and published not to exceed the prespecified deadline set by the organization.

Patient Case Reports and Patient Case Histories are prepared as needed and in a timely fashion. In the early days of the organization when only one or at most a few patients are being cryopreserved per year a full Case Report should be prepared and published. This is done because quality is strongly related to volume and further, each case is likely to be different during the start-up period. A Case Report is not only a full documentation of procedures used on the patient as well the rationale for those procedures, it is also an analysis (within the limits of current understanding) of the outcome of the case including discussions of problems, equipment failures, and areas or specific suggestions for improving future cases.

A Case History is a narrative account of the patient’s care which includes all data collected (where possible presented in graphic form) and a brief summary of the outcome. It may be dictated; it may contain spelling and grammatical errors and most closely resembles the dictated medical narratives required of hospital physicians that must be completed on all their patients with a specified time of their discharge.

In the past, both Case Histories and Case Reports have been difficult and time consuming to prepare. While Case Reports will remain time consuming, both Case Histories and Case Reports must become easier to produce. The most difficult and time-consuming aspects of producing these reports is the need for data reduction, graphing or rendering into other formats that make the data comprehensible. It is imperative that wherever possible all data collected, whether in the field on in the organization’s facilities, be acquired and displayed (and thus be available for printing) in a graphic format. At a minimum wherever technically feasible any data not automatically graphed and displayed in real-time is gathered in comma separated form so that it can be entered into graphing programs that allow its rapid conversion from tabular to graphic display.

Finally, professional medical transcriptionists are to be used to prepare dictated summaries of cases for subsequent editing where appropriate. The cost of such services has declined dramatically with the advent of outsourcing; using skilled personnel, primarily in India, to transcribe these recordings.

##### 4.3.6 “Whistleblower” policy

The CSO shall establish and implement policies and procedures that enable individuals to come forward with information on illegal practices or violations of organizational policies. 

This “whistleblower” policy should specify that the organization will not retaliate against, and will protect the confidentiality of, individuals who make good-faith reports.

#### 4.4 Non-discrimination
Cryonics organizations must not discriminate against clients. The medical model of cryonics as an emergency room where all comers able to meet the publicly specified requirements of the organization are well and equally treated regardless of age, religion, politics, criminal history, gender, sexual orientation, community influence or celebrity will be employed. “Equally” is understood to mean here that all clients will receive the same minimum standards of care set out as being available upon meeting the specified minimum requirements of the organization. It does not imply that higher standards of care may not be paid for by clients able to afford them. However, it does mean that if such higher standards are offered or are available for an added fee or other considerations, that all clients shall be apprised of the availability of such non-standard services as soon as such options are made available.

### 5 R&D

#### 5.1 Prioritization
Expenditure of research dollars should not be on putative revival technologies for the foreseeable future. The enabling technologies required to revive today’s cryonics patients (even those treated under optimum conditions) will necessarily be the province of mainstream industry, medicine and computing technologies. Much basic science remains to be done that is both broad and deep effort. Such efforts are beyond the resources of any of the current cryonics organizations.

Research should be directed towards improving the quality of the preservation process and especially on reversible brain cryopreservation research. No other technological development offers greater benefit to cryonics, not just in terms of increased credibility, but also in terms of reassurance to those with cryonics arrangements and their loved ones that the procedure is indeed capable of preserving their personhood.

Instead of cosmetic, PR-driven enhancements to patient storage facilities cryonics organizations should have a plan to continually upgrade and harden their storage operations to protect against natural disaster, civil unrest or focused terrorism.

#### 5.2 Animal research
Animal research is conducted on an ongoing basis on clinically relevant model(s) to evaluate the effects of the organization’s cryopreservation procedures in ways that cannot be achieved using human patients. Such studies shall also be conducted to advance the state of the art as a whole and to provide both research and training protocols which have as endpoints survival of the animals and other objectifiable endpoints which are determined a priori. All such protocols shall have rigorous scientific design, be reviewed by a qualified Institutional Animal Review and Use Committee and comply with USDA and NIH guidelines for human care and treatment of research animals. Animal research facilities will be Federally licensed and, where possible will meet AALAC (American Association of Laboratory Animal Care) standards if not have AALAC certification. There will be extensive further discussion of these points later in this memorandum.

It is important to pause here and discuss the special criticality of animal research to achieving the objectives set forth above as well as the core objective of the Project.

While it is true that surrogate markers for the quality of cryonics care can be used to good effect to establish feedback and allow for determination of errors and their correction, such surrogates have failed to serve the purpose of maintaining quality care or advancing the state of the art. Indeed, virtually all validated significant technical advances in human cryopreservation have come out of facilities or from manufactures whose products were derived directly from a survival or viability-oriented animal research program.

The reasons why this should be so are complex and possibly not fully understood. At a minimum, it is important to understand that many of the people who will comprise the Cryopreservation Team, including trained medical professionals, will not be willing or perhaps able to grasp the significance of surrogate markers. It's often hard to convey the significance of TEM results even to highly skilled physicians and surgeons. Despite obvious and easily explained differences in the images most of these people seem unable to evaluate them or to understand their significance. Appreciation of graphic data, even of physiologic parameters is very hard to communicate in the setting of a cryopreservation procedure as opposed to the setting of a hospital ICU.

An additional problem is that no one surrogate marker can be considered in isolation as being validating of the quality of the procedure. The vast array of data is meaningful only in context and must be carried over from one part of the procedure to another which may be very remote in time and character from when the data was collected. For instance, physiologic data documenting the adequacy of cardiopulmonary support during transport must be integrated with the patient’s peri-mortem condition, the adequacy of the TBW procedure, and the adequacy of cryoprotection procedures before a meaningful interpretation of the TEMs of the patient’s brain can be made. This is laborious and often seemingly impossible for even highly intelligent and well-educated professionals to do. It is all but impossible to achieve understanding of surrogate markers for most of the team which consists of technical personnel, some of them non-medical.

Survival models, or non-survival models with easily understood endpoints (i.e., perfusion with carbon black following CPS and observing massive defects in circulation, or the lack thereof, provide “automatic” integration of the data into a single, easily understood endpoint.

While not pleasant to consider, there are also several other very powerful mechanisms at work here which are rooted deeply in the nature of human cognition and value systems. Humans are “story creatures” who learn and modify their behavior best when data is presented to them in a narrative form. As an example, a survival experiment is a superb example of a story or narrative presentation of data and skills learning. If you try to teach a task in isolation, such as how to apply a CPS device, maintain sterile technique, etc., retention is likely to be poor and proficiency unacceptable, even with repeated training.

On the other hand, if such skills are integrated into an experiment involving a live animal with survival as the outcome, the focus and the heightened state of emotions and arousal greatly facilitate learning. Such an experiment is, by definition, a narrative process. It begins with a synopsis of the events and a statement of the goals to be achieved. Then each element of the process is both verbalized and experienced as the procedure unfolds. Each part of the procedure is seen (especially with repetition) as relating to others and there is a sense of coherence and mission in a competently conducted survival experiment.

Finally, survival experiments are driven by the core values of healthy (non-pathological) human beings. Because of this they have a dual value. First, they provide a powerful incentive for each person participating to their job well and to learn to do it better. Related to this is the understanding which, if not present before the experiment, is painfully present afterwards in the event of failure, that errors cost lives, create terrible and visible tissue/organ injury and can cause immense suffering. Second, such experiments invariably disclose individuals who are either lack the required temperament (too sensitive), are constitutionally incompetent, habitually careless, or suffer from some type of psychopathology – all which disqualify them as Cryopreservation Team members.

### 6 Addendum: Brief history of attempts to implement minimum standards in cryonics

The first attempt to create formal minimum standards for cryonics organizations in the form of the Cryonics Societies of America (CSA) was initiated by in 1968 and was implemented largely through the efforts of the Cryonics Society of New York and Robert Ettinger. The CSA was to be a national standards and enforcement organization, comprised of representatives elected by the individual, member cryonics societies.

Creation of the CSA, and the terms of its incorporation were agreed to by the Officers/Directors of the then extant cryonics organizations: Cryonics Society of New York (CSNY), Cryonics Society of Michigan (CSM) and Cryonics Society of California (CSC). CSA was incorporated late in 1969.

The CSA called for basic accountability in matters such as 
* public communications
* information inquiries
* membership rolls
* financial and member/patient record keeping (submission of quarterly financial records)
* documentation of cryopreservations
* submission of regular progress reports 
* investigation of all persons or corporations offering cryonics services or promoting cryonics. 

A critical function of the CSA, and the one which may have motivated its initiation, was the creation of a Scientific Advisory Council (SAC) to the CSA. This Board was to have provided scientific and technical advice related to patient care, evaluated research proposals and recommended funding, and lastly and most importantly, serve to improve the public and professional credibility of cryonics. 

The SAC was formed on 05 August, 1968 and the relevant documents as well as its composition were published in Cryonics Reports in September, 1968. The CSA did remain modestly active for perhaps a year after its inception. 

The next attempt to establish industry-wide binding standards was initiated by Fred and Linda Chamberlain of the Alcor Foundation in 1972. The effort had the acronym DOMSAC which stood for "Document of Minimum Standards and Compliance" (DOMSAC). 

The core requirement of the DOMSAC were to: 

"Set minimum standards for all technical aspects of perfusion and cool-down, including data collection formats, parameters to be logged, frequency of data acquisition, minimum equipment and chemicals to be kept on hand at all times, and so on." 

The objectives of the DOMSAC were to:
* Established a basic standard for organization, reporting and public disclosure of patient case data.
* Required continuous public accountability (address, identification, a.k.a. and d.b.a. history on all Officers and Directors).
* Established minimum requirements for emergency notification and communication systems.
* Limited the scope and nature of claims that could be made to the public or prospective members/clients about cryonics.
* Impose substantial administrative requirements, as well as mechanics for handling non-compliance and provisions for punitive measures if necessary.

